June 15, 1999, my 42nd wedding anniversary.
Perfect. And sitting in the beautiful living room
with Dr. Wayne Hall, looking out on a cloudy
morning. Now, let's see. Let's check and see if
yours is working. Yeah, it indeed is cloudy today,
but I think we'll have some sun before it's over. I
suspect so. Now let's see.
To a kind of review, you became vice president and
dean of the college when? Well, to start with, my
initial appointment under Earl Rutter was simply
just dean of the graduate college. School first,
then they changed it to college. But I soon found
out that I was really carrying out the duties of the
dean of the college more than I was of the graduate
school, informally, no title given. Because Boyd
Page, who had been dean of the college, had left to
go to Iowa State University.
I began to wonder how long that might persist or
last, because I used to kid Mr. Rutter. He didn't
care for some of my kiddies sometimes. He was
always having me work three jobs for one price.
Well, anyway, the initial appointment was as dean
of the graduate college. I did not become the
academic vice president. I never did officially
become the dean of the college. We never did. That
died with my time at A&M. But finally, I was able to
convince him, along with many others, that he
should have vice president for academic affairs,
because A&M then was beginning to burgeon and grow
and had many different activities than they had in
the older days. So we convinced him. So he did
appoint me dean of the, I mean, vice president for
academic affairs. So your full title was Vice
President of Academic Affairs and Dean of the
Graduate College. Yeah, there's a little
interesting anecdote about that. As soon as he was
approved there, he said he was going to approve me
as Vice President for Academic Affairs. I said,
well, you want me to start looking now for Dean of
the Graduate College? He said, no, I want you to be
Dean Hall. So we just combined my former title with
the new one, yeah. Do you remember when that was? I
was trying to think. It was around 1960. I may be off
a year or so. I should have brought in some of my
notes. All right. The deans of the colleges then,
excuse me, of the schools, were whom? And please
describe them. Well, the first school to become a
college was agriculture. That happened early in
my, when I was dean of the graduate college. And the
dean at that time was Gus Watkins. who was followed
by Pat Patterson later, but that's digressing.
Dean Benson, Fred Benson was dean of engineering.
They were the two largest schools. Engineering
later became a college, but not immediately.
Veterinary medicine was a school for a number of
years until about the mid-60s. Well, it was after
the aspiration report was made. I proposed to Mr.
Rutter we needed reorganization and establish
some new schools and colleges more in line with
what A&M was becoming. He agreed, and we split off
arts and sciences into liberal arts and later
education and the College of Science, which
immediately was called the College of Science.
Then there was a College of Geosciences formed,
because A&M had always been strong in the
geosciences, mostly the influence, I guess, of
petroleum engineering originally. And
architecture
was the last to be split out as a school from
engineering. Describe those four deans, that
personality that you dealt with first. Well, the
first dean of the school or college of liberal arts
was Frank Hubert, who you know very well. You know
his personality probably better than I do. But how
was he to work with? Frank was always congenial and
easy to work with. We never had a bit of difference.
I sometimes thought Frank was a little lazy, but
that was because I was a gung-ho young man at that
time, I guess. that he let things take its own
development, of course, but maybe that was the
wisest thing in the long run. But he ran a good shop,
and we gave him the choice later when we split out
education, if he wanted to become dean of the
college of education he could over liberal arts,
and he did accept that. Did he give any reason why he
made that choice? Oh, Earl Rudder, as well as
myself, but I was to learn this. Earl knew it. He was
strong in the field of education, well respected
throughout. And we wanted to build up education,
and we thought he would be the natural. But we gave
him the only, he made up his own mind. We didn't
force him to become dean of, because he enjoyed
being dean of liberal arts, too. What about Benson
in personality? Benson was probably the most
capable dean that we've had at A&M, in my
experience, in my lifetime. I mean, I'm sure there
were other great ones.
Benson was thoroughly dedicated to engineering,
and he was willing to cooperate with others and to
get things done. He was a doer, an achiever, and it
sometimes took him longer than he wanted, and he
became a little agitated as a result. But he and I
always got along fine, because we were always on
the same wavelength. I got along with the School of
Engineering better than I did with some of my own
former colleagues in the School of Agriculture or
the College of Agriculture, because we saw things
eye to eye, usually, is the reason.
He was one of the deans that would speak up to Mr.
Rutter. The two of us, I think, myself and he were
the two that were not afraid a bit of Mr. Rutter. We
would tell Mr. Rutter exactly what we thought, and
I think he respected us for it. I've heard two or
three examples of Benson speaking up. Do you
recall any that you can share? Well, one you
already are well aware of was when the Aspirations
Report came out, and I guess Mr. Rudder, in Fred's
presence, was complaining or bitching about the
faculty didn't know what they wanted to make these
recommendations. Fred said to me, I looked him
right in the eye and I said, Mr. Rudder, if you
didn't want the faculty involved, why did you
agree to appoint them? Let them carry out what they
recommend. And how do you think Mr. Rutter
evaluated Benson? I think he thought highly of
Fred, yes. He gave Fred pretty much the people Mr.
Rutter trusted and had confidence in. He gave him a
pretty free rein of doing. Of course, we all
checked with him on major decisions. We never
tried to run something by him without That
wouldn't work well, would it? No. In fact, you were
more apt to get it approved if you took it to him and
discussed it in a rational way with him. Earl could
be convinced about the merit of things. Did he meet
regularly with you and the deans? Well, initially
for the first year or so, when I was still just dean
of the graduate school, and Dorsey McCrory was his
administrative assistant. The three of us really
ran A&M for about three years. No, there was
nothing else. Well, I say we ran it, of course, with
the board's approval of the future protocol. But I
mean on campus. No, we didn't consult with the
other deans. We just made up our mind what should be
done and did it. And in those days, you could do it.
You couldn't do it in modern times, no. No, but
later I convinced Mr. Rutter that we should have a
little more democratic way of administration. So
we formed the Dean's Council. Mr. Rutter was the
chair of it, and I would take it in his absence. We
would meet weekly. Of course, sometimes it would
go two and three weeks when Mr. Rutter was out of
town or I was tied up or something. But I usually
would take it over and run it in his absence. What
are the kinds of topics that group would deal with?
They were mostly academic. We didn't deal with
political topics or how to do things or anything
like that. It was just how to get your own job done in
your own bailiwick. In other words, if you were in
chemistry, how chemists should be performing.
Did you all discuss new degree programs? Oh, yeah.
The first five years I was just run ragged in
developing new degree plans. Mr. Rutter and I
spent more time over in Austin convincing the
coordinator, the director of the coordinating
board, who was somebody else before Jack was
appointed. Incidentally, I don't know if you know
the story of how Jack came to Texas or not. No, I'd
love to hear that. Well, I knew Jack when we were
both graduate deans. He was graduate dean for a
number of years at Clemson, and we served on a
number of committees together. We had a great high
respect for each other. We liked each other. He was
a very congenial person to get along with, in my
opinion.
I think it was Davies, Dr. Davies vacated the
coordinating board. They were asking the
university presidents or two university
presidents to make recommendations for possible
candidates. And I suggested to Mr. Rutter that I
thought Jack Williams would make an excellent
coordinator or director of the coordinating
board. And that's the way his name got into the
hopper. I had nothing to do with it after that. Oh
my, I did not know that. Did not know that. Because I
think it is almost as if somebody upstairs was
planning it. In a way? The sequence of Rudder and
then Williams. Well, Earl liked Jack, too. Of
course, Jack had been a gung-ho Marine and had
great respect for the military. And he was an
outstanding Marine, too, as far as I remember his
record. And Mr. Rutter respected that.
In terms of creating new programs, do you remember
any that you thought of as great victories? And do
you remember any that didn't go the way you wanted
them to go? Oh, there were both achievements and
disappointments throughout. I
think the reorganization into the schools and
colleges, which still largely exist, was one of
the real satisfactory achievements. And
developing mainly not only all academic
programs, but the new graduate programs. Because
Mr. Rudder and I agreed early that A&M was never
going to mount anything as a university unless we
had an outstanding graduate and research
program. That's where we put the emphasis in the
early years. As a result, if you'll check the
record, probably during my tenure there and Mr.
Rudder's, I would say forty percent of the current
programs were approved during that time. We were a
frequent visitor over there trying to convince
the people in the coordinating board and so forth
to approve things. They almost would laugh that we
were members of their staff. Do you remember any
that they snuffed, they turned down? Initially,
they would not approve a college of education. Mr.
Rutter had to use some of his strong influence to
finally get it approved, because they thought A&M
did not. There was talk about law and medicine even
in those days, but they turned a deaf ear to those in
the early days. They still do, I guess, as far as law
is concerned, except the venture down in Houston.
And so the key lobbying in Austin was done by Mr.
Rutter and by you and anybody else in those years,
in the 60s? Whenever it was before the board for
approval, we would usually, in fact we would
always take the dean if they were available to
help. to make the proposal and defend the request.
Yeah, no, we worked not only on the Coordinating
Board, but on key legislators, too. Bill
Williams, not Bill Williams, Bill Moore, as you
know, carried the ball here pretty much, directly
working mostly with Mr. Rutter on it. Was there
even an official A&M lobbyist in those days? No,
not in those early years. Mr. Rutter did all of that
himself. He wanted to handle the political
matters, and he handled them very effectively, in
my opinion, too. How responsive was John Connolly
to A&M proposals? John liked Earl very much,
because they were Politicians of the same kind of
cloth, put it that way. And he used to kid their own
and vice versa about the University of Texas
versus A&M. He didn't want A&M to ever get its
biggest University of Texas, or to be as
outstanding and all this, but thought it was a
good-natured banner. No, he would approve things
after a while, but Mr. Rutter always did his
homework very effectively. He would contact the
key people that had the clout throughout the
state, whether it was in Amarillo or in San Antonio
or Houston or Dallas, wherever it was, and he would
have his proponents lined up. came up for action,
two or three, if nothing more, telephone calls
from these key people would swing the vote when
they were reluctant to do it initially. Were there
key allies in the legislature other than Bill
Moore? Well, yeah. Surprisingly, Swartz, even
though he and Bill Moore didn't get along, Earl and
I used to go down to cultivate Mr. to get him to vote
on our side. There were others, I can't recall all
the names right now, but some of them were former
students and some were not. And Brownrick Dewey
was our representative. Yeah, he was our long—I
worked more with Mr. Dewey than Mr. Rutter did. He
worked directly with Bill Moore. The only time I
ever dealt with Bill Moore was when he was
unavailable or he was out of town or something had
to be done and he would ask me to go. But I'd have
regular meetings with Brown. Oh yeah, we were, I
started to say great buddies, we weren't quite
that, but we were good friends. And he would do
almost anything to get anything done for A&M. He
was a great friend of ours too, although he's
largely gone unheralded. He didn't get the press
that Bill Moore got. Let's go through the
aspirations and all that, the aspirations
report. As far as you know, where did the idea
originate for a kind of an, you started the other
day Telling how it originated? With the Southern
Association self-study. Yeah. That's really
what prompted it, or at least that's the way I
convinced Mr. Rutter that we should do our own
personal study. Not only what was required for the
accreditation, but where we really wanted to go
and put it down and get key people to endorse it. If
you and I both know, you don't get great ideas
approved and endorsed unless you carry the votes
for it when it's required. That's where the
aspirations study came about. Of course, from
that was the blueprint for progress, as we called
it. Who selected the individual members of the
aspirations committee? It was a combination of,
well, we would get input from any number, but Mr.
Rutter and I coordinated the input. Bill Barzak
and I the other day were comparing notes, and
neither of us knew how the two of us got on there.
How? Well, that was through my intersection.
Yeah, I recommended that. I mean, Mr. Rutter gave
me almost free rein of appointing the internal
members. How did you know that we existed then?
This was before Bill and I had worked for you. Oh, I
know. Yeah, Bill was my first assistant dean of the
graduate college that I appointed. But wasn't
this before he was the assistant dean? Was he
already working for you then? Oh, yeah. I
appointed him almost immediately. It was the
first year I was graduate dean, Mr. Rutter. How did
you identify him? Well, to be frank, Mr. Rutter
wanted me to get somebody who was capable of
writing. because he had a lot of writing
assignments and he wanted somebody. Dorsey would
do a lot of it, but Dorsey was not a real, he wasn't an
English professor, but he was capable. So that's
one reason, from English. And we both liked Bill
when we interviewed him. I knew Bill from my
professor days. I got acquainted with almost
everybody throughout A&M when I was. Then
as the aspirations report was being done, did
anybody keep you informed about what it looked
like was forthcoming? Yeah, I don't know if you
recall all of the different committees and
subcommittees and so forth. I know you attended a
lot of them, and I tried to attend a lot, and Bill
did, and Barczak, and oh, a number of other people.
Mr. Rutter didn't personally attend any of the
committee meetings that I ever recall, I mean the
faculty or the on-campus committees. All right,
now when we got through I had the impression that
Mr. Rutter was a bit surprised by the breadth of the
recommendations. Yeah, I think honestly now in
reflection that Mr. Rutter thought we were trying
to cut off too big a piece, a bigger piece than we
could chew. which didn't turn out that way at all.
But I convinced him, and unless you really dream
and so forth, you're not going to have high goals to
obtain. A lot of them will never probably reach,
but you can't reach them unless you establish that
that's where you want to go. Now, when the final
report came in, do you think that his reservations
were based upon the fact that he opposed some of
them or that he was fearful simply that he couldn't
bring them about. I think it was a combination of
both factors Haskell started with. No, he didn't
agree with everything. He thought the faculty was
trying to seek too big a role for itself. Mr. Rutter
was a strong authoritarian, as you well know, and
believed in the power being at the top and
descending downward. Well, he was a former
general. That was his training, and that's what he
did well at. And A&M was a military school when he
came here. Still is, in a way. And for that era,
thank goodness that he had some strength. Oh,
yeah. There was Mr. Earls. Mr. Earls, I shouldn't
say that. Mr. Rudder's tenacity and
determination and bulldogging. A lot of these
things would never come about. Was the board kept
well aware of the way the aspirations report
looked like it was going? Not initially, I don't
think. Mr. Rutter was fearful. I didn't answer
fully your last question. Not only did he think
that the faculty had too high an aspiration and
wanted too high a lofty goal for itself, but he
thought that the board would never approve some of
these old-time Aggies that were on the board with
influence. Mr. Rudder was hesitant that they
would ever endorse them. But he found out that most
of them did eventually. But a lot of the board
members and the politicians that had the clout,
the political clout in the state, the people that
did, thought the faculty would take its normal
course anyway, as most faculty does. Mr. Rutter
thought, as well as a lot of others, the role of the
faculty was to teach. That was it. It wasn't to
politic or to administrate or leave that up to the
people that had the power of clout. Which board
members, I think they were still called board of
directors then. Yeah, they were. Which board
members were most positive, and if you know, most
negative about the Aspirations Report
recommendations? Well, I don't want to do anybody
injustice.
I think Jimmy Aston was one of those that endorsed
it quite well, and J. Harold Dunn from Amarillo was
a great supporter of it. Pete Peterson, who had
been on the board during that era, had some
reservations, but he would do what Mr. Rutter
would ask him to do. Sterling Evans initially had
quite a few reservations, although he may say
otherwise. But he eventually came around and was a
full backer, yeah. But initially he had
considerable reservations. Pat Zachary was one
of the strong leaders at the time at San Antonio.
And as long as engineering got a place in the sun,
Pat would endorse the rest, usually. But you
wanted to make sure the engineering group was
taken care of first. Let's sidetrack on that. Is
one of the consistent features of A&M down through
the years the comparative rivalry for first place
between engineers and ag leaders? I'm talking
about first place here on the campus. Is that a kind
of consistent part of the story? I think it is from
the founding of A&M when initially that's what
they were, agriculture and engineering. There
was considerable rivalry. Agriculture took off
first and probably had that leadership role for a
while, and engineering caught up. But in what I
call the modern era, engineering not only caught
up, but probably was rivaling agriculture for a
leading role. Fred Benson was a great person. Not
only was he a strong leader of engineering, but he
was a good man to cooperate in anything that was
true academic
And I'm assuming, too, this kind of reflected the
change of the state of Texas from an
agricultural-dominated state to now
technologically-dominated. Yeah. Well,
agriculture is still strong in the state. In fact,
it's probably the leading agriculture school in
the country yet. But it's much more modernized, as
you know. It's more heavily science-based
anymore than it was in the older days. Back to
aspirations, do you remember any specific
incidents that were kind of symbolic of what
happened with the aspirations recommendations?
What happened from them? Do you remember any
specific events that helped to explain the
eventual approval of the aspirations report
recommendations? Well, I may be wrong, but this is
my interpretation, which I'll state. I think they
were approved and became successful because they
were right for A&M. They were exactly right for
A&M. That's what A&M should have. In fact, I used to
yelp to Mr. Rutter in the early days. unless we
establish where we want to go and really build
this, you're never going to have a place in the sun.
You'll probably lose out for all time. Well, and I
agree, particularly looking back now, if we
hadn't done it about then, We'd be so far behind.
Oh, right. If we hadn't become coeducation and a
number of other things, A&M would be a fourth-rate
institution now. One of the recommendations that
didn't get approved was the name change to Texas
State University. Who came up with the
abbreviation A&M as it is now? Well, as simple as
just a name change might seem to some people, It
actually took more time with Mr. Rutter and Dorsey
McCrory and I on these evening long battles than
any other subject initially. And then it had the
same fate when it went to the dean's council, to the
academic council, all along the way. People just
couldn't agree on what the name should be. And
finally, As I recall, I suggested that we call it
university. Everybody agreed it had to be
university. But what university? And I said,
well, the heritage of the past is A&M. That stands
for agriculture mechanical. Well, let's forget
about it. Let's just put capital A without period,
capital M without period. and call it, because we
are in the state of Texas, Texas A&M University.
Eventually, after a lot of harassment and
disappointment, it was approved. Mr. Rudder
didn't like it originally. He used to say, well,
what does A&M without periods really stand for?
Now, did he have a favorite, or do you remember? I'm
trying to recall. He did at one time, although he
was mostly more of a devil's advocate about names
that were suggested and then suggesting them
himself, as I recall. Dorsey McCroy just used to
reel them off by the dozen in our personal
discussions. In these private discussions of you
and Mr. Rutter and or you and Dorsey and Mr. Rutter,
Clearly, it was okay for people to say exactly what
they thought. In other words, you could, in those
discussions, you... Oh, I mean in our personal
discussion? Yes. Oh, yeah. We often had quite
heated debates, but nothing in anger. You're
right. I mean, it was just forceful to...
enthusiastic debate. Mr. Rutter wasn't afraid
to say, you're crazy as hell. I would never say that
to him. I used to try to convince him in a rational
way what something that he wanted done wasn't
feasible or shouldn't be done. Do you remember any
examples of where he literally changed his mind?
He started down this way and eventually ended up
over here? Yeah, there was a number of things that
came about that he initially was opposed to. He
didn't want the name change to start with. He
definitely didn't want coeducation, and he
didn't want the voluntary corps. But he came to
them. Admission requirements, did that, to
gradually make those more restrictive, did that
bother anybody? Initially, Mr. Rutter used to
question me when I was saying, well, you've got to
tighten the screws on a mission. I tried to
convince him that high standards didn't turn
students away, that sometimes low standards did,
too low standards. And it took a while to convince
him. In fact, he was concerned because enrollment
was falling when he came here. it had to be beefed up
or A&M wasn't gonna survive. That was as simple as
that. And so he was concerned that we might turn
students away. But I finally convinced him, and
after showing him what was happening, that higher
standards was the thing that would attract the
outstanding students, along with the
President's scholarships that we established.
There's various versions how that got
established. I've read them myself. But I can tell
you frankly how it got established. Earl Rudder
asked me to draw up the recommendations to form
them.